[ENH]: BEP032 formal review (#2307)
bids-standard/bids-specification: src/modality-specific-files/microelectrode-electrophysiology.md

)
}}

## Sidecar JSON (`*_icephys.json` and `*_ecephys.json`)

All metadata that is not directly related to one of the other metadata files (probe/electrode/channel information) should be stored in a single JSON file corresponding to the datatype: `_icephys.json` or `_ecephys.json` for intracellular and extracellular, respectively.

There should be one such JSON file for each data file.

The `*_ecephys.json` or `*_icephys.json` file can be used to store any microephys-specific metadata for the dataset. All setup-related metadata should be stored in a dedicated node of the JSON file called `Setup`.
We recommend using the following keys to describe the setup:

### Institution Information

{{ MACROS___make_sidecar_table("microephys.microephysInstitutionInformation") }}

### Setup Information

{{ MACROS___make_sidecar_table("microephys.microephysSetup") }}

### Processing Information

{{ MACROS___make_sidecar_table("microephys.microephysProcessing") }}

### Additional Procedure Information

Furthermore, additional information can be stored about the recording procedure.
We RECOMMEND to use a dedicated `Procedure` node with the following keys:

-   `Pharmaceuticals`
-   `Sample`

> -   `Supplementary`

Reviewer: This appears to be vestigial, as there is no `Procedure` metadata defined in the schema, and `PharmaceuticalName` is shown directly in the top-level metadata. (I'm assuming "node" means a field in a JSON structure.)

Reviewer 2: Hey BEP032 team, @effigies is right that this it is very unclear what "node" refers to and I honestly don't remember. Prior to this we say `"The *_ecephys.json or *_icephys.json file can be used to store any microephys-specific metadata for the dataset. All setup-related metadata should be stored in a dedicated node of the JSON file called Setup."`. For me this reads as if we intended the `*_ecephys.json` or `*_icephys.json` to be nested jsons, that provide information of setup and procedure under highlevel keys`"setup"` and `"procedure"`, but I think this is not true. Except for the filter metadata `*_ecephys.json` or `*_icephys.json` are supposed to be flat. 

My suggestion: The node reference is confusing I would just delete it. Setup, Procedure (with Pharmaceuticals, Sample, Supplementary) are just subheaders to structure all possible keys of the `*_ecephys.json` and `*_icephys.json` sidecars.

This brings up though another general issue I see: for me the sample metadata in the `*_ecephys.json` and `*_icephys.json` sidecars (and actually in the microscopy sidecar JSON files) compared to what is/should be provided in the samples.tsv and samples.json is a bit unclear. I would have assumed that all in samples.tsv and samples.json refers to the unprocessed sample (so all that is true always for sample X, such as sample type, slice thickness, extraction protocol, etc) while the sample keys in the `*_ecephys.json`, `*_icephys.json` and microscopy JSON sidecars cover additional processes applied sequentially (such as staining, pharmaceuticals, etc) or sample related acquisition variables (such as deformation, etc) or information on tissue structures when there is no sample (such as examined body part in a typical ecephys case,or intravital microscopy settings). This seems to be not the logic though. Sorry to raise this now... I guess we cannot do much about this now, but maybe we can deliver good examples of what to define where and when for samples?

ephys/sub-P001_task-push_run-02_ephys.nix	2018-07-15T15:24:00
```

It is recommended to accompany the  `*_scans.tsv` file with a corresponding `*_scans.json`
sidecar file, as described in the [BIDS specifications](https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/03-modality-agnostic-files.html#scans-file).

### Multiple recordings in a single data file (`*_events.tsv`)

The `*_events.tsv` should be used to provide information about multiple parts of an acquisition
session when the data from each of these different recordings is stored in a single data file.
In such a case, this file is REQUIRED.
This allows benefiting from the capability of the supported data formats (NIX and NWB) to store multiple
recordings in a single file, which can be convenient when these recordings share numerous characteristics
(for example, for subsequent recordings obtained on a single cell in intracellular electrophysiology).
In such case, the information about these recordings should be stored in columns added in the
`*_events.tsv` file, which are listed now.

Optional column names in `events.tsv` to support multiple recordings in a single data file:

> <!-- TODO: Macro for events -->

Reviewer: Missing table here. Looks like the following, rendered:

<img width="660" height="129" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/3d3470aa-1a8b-4a60-bfba-1865d60807bf" />

  "TaskDescription": "Spontaneous activity recording with no task",
  "InstitutionName": "Example University",
  "PowerLineFrequency": 60,
  "SamplingFrequency": 30000,
  "HardwareFilters": {
    "HighpassFilter": {
      "Half-amplitude cutoff (Hz)": 0.1,
      "Roll-off": "6dB/Octave"
    }
  },
  "SoftwareFilters": "n/a",
  "RecordingType": "continuous",
  "PharmaceuticalName": ["ketamine", "xylazine"],
  "PharmaceuticalDoseAmount": [10, 1],
  "PharmaceuticalDoseUnits": ["mg/kg", "mg/kg"],
  "BodyPart": "BRAIN",
  "SampleEnvironment": "in-vivo"
}
```

#### Intracellular Electrophysiology (Patch)

This dataset contains intracellular data from slices acquired from two subjects (20220101-A and 20220101B). Details about the subjects and the sample generation are documented in the samples (tsv/json) files. Data of each subject is stored in separate subject directories (top level directories), each of which contains an 'icephys/' subdirectory. Note that there is no session-level directory in this case. Here, we choose the option of having "multiple tasks/runs in separate files" to demonstrate the high level of readability offered by the filenames in this case.

> For the first subject only a single sample (a cell for patch-clamp terminology) was extracted (sample-cell001), on which three different protocol recordings were performed: two runs of current injection to characterize intrinsic properties, and one run of synaptic stimulation. The `scans.tsv` file stores information such as the starting recording times. The detailed information on the recording channel (such as the recording mode used) is stored in the `channels.tsv` which, in this case, is common to all available recordings. The probes and electrodes files provide information on the pipette and solutions used for the recordings and are also shared across data files.

Reviewer: The `sample-<label>` entity is first introduced here and only described in the photos section. As a reader it came out of nowhere.

This appears to have been taken from microscopy. I would reuse text from there to the extent that it's applicable.

Is `samples.tsv` required if the `sample-<label>` entity is used? Is it permitted?

Reviewer 3: Hey BEP032 team, let's discuss @effigies 's point about `sample-<label>` coming out of nowhere. He's right that it's under-explained, and digging in I found the requirement level is inconsistent between the prose and the examples, plus a schema gap. Here's what I'd suggest, but curious what you all think:

**Introduce the entity up front.** Right now its only real definition is buried in the Photos section, framed as just for histological photos, but the intracellular examples use it on every file (`sample-cell001`, etc.). I'd propose adding a definition near the top in "Terminology: Modality and Datatypes," adapted from the microscopy text.

**Split the requirement level by datatype** rather than making it uniformly optional or copying microscopy's blanket REQUIRED:

- `ecephys` (in-vivo extracellular): OPTIONAL, and typically absent, since there's no tissue sample. Requiring it here would be wrong.
- `icephys` (patch): REQUIRED. A patched cell effectively *is* a sample, and the datatype inherently deals in discrete cells/slices. This matches what our intracellular example already does (every file is `sample-cellNNN`) and mirrors how `micr` treats it.

In the schema this is just leaving `sample: optional` for ecephys and changing it to `sample: required` in the icephys block of `microephys.yaml`.

One sub-question: `micr` does *not* exempt the single-sample case (one sample per subject still gets `sample-01`). I'd suggest we follow that, since a single-sample exemption causes filename churn if a second cell is added later and forces tools to special-case it. So: required for icephys even when there's only one sample.

**`samples.tsv`.** Chris also asked whether it's required when the entity is used. It currently isn't enforced at all for microephys, since `SamplesTSVMissing` only triggers on `"micr" in dataset.modalities`. I'd suggest requiring `samples.tsv` whenever the `sample-` entity is present (which, with the split above, means always for icephys and only-if-used for ecephys), and adding a check keyed on entity-presence rather than modality.

**`samples.tsv` columns we inherit.** These are modality-agnostic, so microephys gets them for free: `sample_id` (required), `participant_id` (required), `sample_type` (required), `pathology` (recommended), `derived_from` (recommended). They all fit microephys fine, so I don't think we need to define anything new. Two things worth a quick look:

- `sample_type` is a **required** enum, and its full value list is broader than just cell types: `tissue`, `whole organisms`, `organoid`, `technical sample`, plus `cell line` / `in vitro differentiated cells` / `primary cell` / `cell-free sample` / `cloning host`. So an acute slice maps cleanly to `tissue` and organoid recordings to `organoid` — no missing values. The only thing to settle is a **granularity convention**: for patch clamp, is the "sample" the slice or the individual cell? If it's the cell, `tissue` is still the closest `sample_type`. We could also register both and use `derived_from` to link `sample-cell001` back to `sample-slice01`. I'd suggest we pick one convention and document it.
- `sample_id` labels are restricted to `^sample-[0-9a-zA-Z+]+$` (no underscores/hyphens), so `sample-cell001` is fine but keep that in mind for examples.

**Cleanup.** Trim the Photos-section mention down to a back-reference to the new definition.

If the per-datatype split (optional ecephys / required icephys) and the entity-presence trigger for `samples.tsv` sound right, I'm happy to put up the edits. The main thing I'd want to settle first is the sample granularity convention (cell vs. slice) for patch data.

Reviewer 4: nice dig!  I do not know much about icephys, but is it really that there would be multiple samples per each subject?  ATM we do mandate `sub-` entity already, so if it is actually typical to have multiple samples - people would just use it if/where needed to disambiguate within subject, so we do not even need to make it RECOMMENDED.

And yes, I would recommend having `samples.tsv` if `_sample-` entity is used.

NB/backref -- this will add one more "consistent" case for `samples.tsv` to be inconsistent' in having dual-index for a single plural entity filename as mentioned in #2283

Reviewer 3: Yes, multiple samples per subject is normal for icephys. A single animal commonly yields several slices, and several cells are patched per slice, so >1 sample per subject is the rule, not the exception.

On the requirement level: `sub-` alone can't disambiguate samples *within* a subject, and as you note people would reach for `sample-` to do that anyway. So the real choice is whether `sample-` is present inconsistently (only when >1) or always. The problem with "only when needed" is churn: collect one cell → `sub-X_...`, collect a second later → you now have to rename the first file to add `sample-`, and tools have to special-case the single-sample form. `micr` avoids this by requiring `sample-` even for a single sample, and I'd lean toward icephys following it for the same reason.

Agreed on requiring `samples.tsv` whenever `sample-` is used.

That said, the required-vs-optional call (and the related cell-vs-slice granularity convention) has real trade-offs in both directions, so I think it warrants input from the larger BEP032 team before we settle it.

Reviewer 2: Hey. Here my feedback.

**Introduce the entity up front.** I agree with your suggestion.

**Split the requirement level by datatype** It's good to make it OPTIONAL for ecephys (although "since there's no tissue sample" is not correct, just not the typical case). It should indeed be required for icephys.

**requiring samples.tsv whenever sample- is used** I would agree to that (I think this is the case already no?). From a metadata management point of view this is very annoying that this is not the case for subjects. Even if there is only one subject (or sample) you want to have structured information on that subject (or sample).

From my point of view all those cases can be true and should be possible to model in BIDS: one sample per subject, multiple samples per subject, one sample from multiple subjects, sample with no subject.

**sample_type** the enum list is indeed insufficient and should be extended/revised. We encountered this problem already for the atlas/microscopy people that started to use BIDS. However I'm not sure if they ever raised that issue officially. As inspiration, here is the list we use in [openMINDS](https://openminds.docs.om-i.org/en/latest/instance_libraries/terminologies/tissueSampleType.html) (which was usage driven so most likely also not complete).

Reviewer 5: > **sample_type** the enum list is indeed insufficient and should be extended/revised. We encountered this problem already for the atlas/microscopy people that started to use BIDS. However I'm not sure if they ever raised that issue officially. As inspiration, here is the list we use in [openMINDS](https://openminds.docs.om-i.org/en/latest/instance_libraries/terminologies/tissueSampleType.html) (which was usage driven so most likely also not complete).

Hi, I jump in a little bit (yes, I'm still around and following ;) ). Wanted to attend the meeting yesterday but finally couldn't...

I've had the same experience with the definition and use of sample for some microscopy data recently... With two issues:
- the enum list (I concurr with @lzehl , it should be extended/revised)
- the granularity question, which is in fact, if I'm not mistaken, not formally settled in the microscopy specs, leading to potential different interpretations of the micr specs (a case I encountered)

So I agree and support what you're doing here, in particular the addition of the text to define the granularity!

## Examples of Real Datasets

Several real-world datasets have been formatted using this specification and can be used for practical guidance when curating a new dataset.
<!-- TODO: Update with current real datasets. A current version of these datasets [can be found on GIN](https://gin.g-node.org/NeuralEnsemble/BEP032-examples) .

For a complete dataset including all data samples the extracellular microelectrode dataset published in [Brochier (2018)](https://doi.org/10.1038/sdata.2018.55) has been reorganized according to the current version of this BEP, using the NIX data format.
The up-to-date version of the dataset [can be found on GIN](https://gin.g-node.org/sprenger/multielectrode_grasp/src/bep_animalephys) .

> We will also publish another dataset using the NWB data format in the near future, and a dataset acquired -->

Reviewer: This TODO appears undone. If it is not ready, I would remove this section and open an issue to add it later.

Reviewer 4: I think it came from good old times when also @JuliaSprenger was involved in this BEP, so that https://gin.g-node.org/sprenger/multielectrode_grasp/src/bep_animalephys was created. But overall it was left as TODO since it is a chicken-egg issue. We can't have this until we finalize BEP since otherwise those datasets might not be valid ones. I wonder also if we could/should just point to https://github.com/bids-dandisets/ which would have many of such examples.  I would not bother with https://gin.g-node.org/NeuralEnsemble/BEP032-examples though since those are largely replaced with bids-examples. But I would leave in smth like

```suggestion
Several real-world datasets have been formatted using this specification and can be used for practical guidance when curating a new dataset.
<!-- TODO: Upon finalization of the BEP032, update with current real datasets if they are updated to the spec and pass bids-validator.

For a complete dataset including all data samples the extracellular microelectrode dataset published in [Brochier (2018)](https://doi.org/10.1038/sdata.2018.55) has been reorganized according to the current version of this BEP, using the NIX data format and [hosted on GIN](https://gin.g-node.org/sprenger/multielectrode_grasp/src/bep_animalephys) .
Also numerous datasets from the [DANDI Archive](https://dandiarchive.org) have been converted to BIDS using [nwb2bids]() and shared [on GitHub](https://github.com/bids-dandisets/).
>
```

Reviewer 5: > I think it came from good old times when also @JuliaSprenger was involved in this BEP, so that https://gin.g-node.org/sprenger/multielectrode_grasp/src/bep_animalephys was created. But overall it was left as TODO since it is a chicken-egg issue. We can't have this until we finalize BEP since otherwise those datasets might not be valid ones. I wonder also if we could/should just point to https://github.com/bids-dandisets/ which would have many of such examples. I would not bother with https://gin.g-node.org/NeuralEnsemble/BEP032-examples though since those are largely replaced with bids-examples. But I would leave in smth like

I confirm this historical point! The use of GIN to host such example datasets is probably obsolete now and any reference to it, at least the ones created by Julia Sprenger, should  be removed... The TODO list is also outdated (same timeframe / investigator)...

Reviewer 5: from what I know, the data available at https://gin.g-node.org/sprenger/multielectrode_grasp/src/bep_animalephys is old (last change 4 years ago), and therefore not compliant with the current state of the specs... I think @ree-gupta has produced a version of the same dataset (from Brochier 2018) that should be compliant with the current specs... we could simply replace the old link with the one that's up-to-date...
